SHIFTSCOUT PROJECT EXPLANATION
==============================

1. PROJECT OVERVIEW
-------------------

ShiftScout is a basic job-hunting portal written entirely in Python. It allows a
user to enter personal information, paste or import CV text, search for jobs,
receive ranked recommendations, generate an application note, and keep a local
list of interesting jobs.

The project uses only modules included with Python. No pip installation, paid
AI service, or API key is required.

Main technologies:

* tkinter and tkinter.ttk: graphical desktop interface
* sqlite3: local profile and application storage
* urllib.request: optional retrieval of live jobs
* threading: keeps the interface responsive during network requests
* json: reads responses from the live job feed
* re: extracts and compares keywords
* dataclasses: represents the user's profile cleanly
* unittest: automated tests

The word "agent" in this MVP describes a transparent, rule-based workflow. It
does not use a large language model. The agent performs several connected steps:

1. Understand the user's goal and skills.
2. Create a search plan.
3. Retrieve available jobs.
4. Score jobs against the user's profile.
5. Explain each score.
6. Help the user prepare and track an application.

This design is intentionally simple, explainable, free to run, and easy to
extend later with a real AI model or additional job sources.


2. PROJECT FILES
----------------

app.py
    Contains the complete application: models, database operations, job agent,
    graphical interface, live-job retrieval, and startup code.

test_app.py
    Contains automated unit tests for matching, profile storage, and application
    note generation.

README.md
    Contains short setup and usage instructions.

PROJECT_EXPLANATION.txt
    Contains this detailed explanation of the code and program logic.

shiftscout.db
    Created automatically the first time the program starts. This SQLite file
    stores the profile and tracked jobs locally. It is not necessary to create
    it manually.


3. HOW TO RUN THE PROJECT
-------------------------

Requirements:

* Python 3.10 or newer is recommended.
* Python must include Tkinter. Standard Windows Python installations normally do.
* Internet access is optional.

From the project directory, run:

    python app.py

To run the automated tests, use:

    python -m unittest -v

If the "python" command is not recognized, install Python from python.org and
select the installer option that adds Python to PATH.


4. OVERALL PROGRAM FLOW
-----------------------

When app.py runs, this statement at the bottom starts the portal:

    App().mainloop()

App() creates the graphical window and all required helper objects. mainloop()
starts Tkinter's event loop, which waits for actions such as button clicks.

The normal user journey is:

1. The user enters a name, email, location, desired role, skills, and CV text.
2. The user saves the profile or clicks "Run job agent."
3. The form is validated and stored in SQLite.
4. JobAgent creates a readable search plan.
5. The application downloads live jobs or uses the demo catalogue.
6. JobAgent scores and sorts the jobs.
7. The interface displays the highest-scoring jobs first.
8. Selecting a job displays its score, explanation, URL, and description.
9. The user can track the job or generate an application note.

The portal does not submit real job applications. The user stays in control and
must review every vacancy and application before taking action.


5. IMPORTS AND CONSTANTS
------------------------

The imports at the beginning of app.py provide all supporting functionality.

DB_PATH
    Points to shiftscout.db in the same directory as app.py. Using __file__
    makes the database location reliable even if the program is launched from
    another working directory.

KNOWN_SKILLS
    A Python set of common skills such as Python, SQL, Docker, customer service,
    and project management. The agent looks for these phrases in the user's
    skills field and CV.

DEMO_JOBS
    A list of dictionaries containing sample jobs. Each dictionary has a title,
    company, location, remote flag, description, and URL. Demo jobs make the
    project usable without internet access and make its behavior easy to test.

In production, the known skills list could be expanded, loaded from a file, or
replaced by an NLP or embedding model.


6. TEXT CLEANING
----------------

Function: clean_text(value)

Live job descriptions can contain HTML tags and escaped characters. clean_text:

1. Converts escaped HTML text into normal characters using html.unescape.
2. Removes HTML tags using a regular expression.
3. Replaces repeated whitespace with a single space.
4. Removes whitespace at the beginning and end.

This produces readable text and improves keyword matching.


7. THE PROFILE DATA MODEL
-------------------------

Class: Profile

Profile is a dataclass. A dataclass is a concise way to create an object whose
main purpose is storing related data.

Profile fields:

* name: candidate's full name
* email: candidate's email address
* location: preferred or current location
* desired_role: type of job the candidate wants
* skills: comma-separated skills entered manually
* cv_text: pasted or imported CV content
* remote_only: True when only remote work should be considered

Using one Profile object instead of passing seven unrelated values makes the
rest of the code easier to read and extend.


8. LOCAL DATABASE LOGIC
-----------------------

Class: Store

Store owns all SQLite operations. Keeping database code in one class separates
data storage from job matching and interface code.

Store.__init__(path)
    Opens a SQLite connection. By default it uses shiftscout.db. Tests can pass
    a temporary database path instead.

    check_same_thread=False allows the connection to exist alongside the search
    worker thread. In this project, writes are still performed through simple,
    short methods.

    Two tables are created if they do not already exist.

Profile table:

    profile(
        id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY CHECK(id=1),
        name TEXT,
        email TEXT,
        location TEXT,
        desired_role TEXT,
        skills TEXT,
        cv_text TEXT,
        remote_only INTEGER
    )

The CHECK(id=1) design means the app stores one current profile. SQLite has no
separate Boolean storage class, so remote_only is saved as 0 or 1.

Applications table:

    applications(
        id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
        title TEXT,
        company TEXT,
        url TEXT,
        status TEXT,
        created_at TEXT
    )

Each tracked job receives its own automatically generated ID.

Store.save_profile(profile)
    Uses INSERT OR REPLACE with ID 1. Saving again replaces the previous profile.
    Parameter placeholders (?) keep values separate from SQL and prevent SQL
    injection caused by form text. commit() permanently saves the transaction.

Store.load_profile()
    Reads the single profile row. It returns a Profile object when data exists or
    None on the first run. The stored 0 or 1 is converted back to bool.

Store.track(job)
    Inserts a selected job in the applications table with status "Interested"
    and the current local date and time.

Store.applications()
    Retrieves applications in reverse ID order, so the newest appears first.

All personal information stays in the local database. The program does not send
the user's name, email, or CV to the live job source.


9. THE RULE-BASED JOB AGENT
---------------------------

Class: JobAgent

JobAgent contains the project's agentic workflow. It has no user-interface code
and no database dependency, which makes it easy to test.

9.1 Skill extraction: infer_skills(profile)

The method combines the manually entered skills and CV text, then converts the
result to lowercase. It checks whether each KNOWN_SKILLS phrase appears as a
complete term. It also adds every comma-separated skill entered by the user.

A set removes duplicates. The final result is sorted for predictable output.

Example:

    Skills field: Python, SQL
    CV text: Built Flask applications using Git
    Result: flask, git, python, sql

This is keyword extraction rather than generative AI. It is deterministic: the
same profile always produces the same skills.

9.2 Planning: plan(profile)

The plan method turns profile information into a short readable plan. It selects
the desired role as the search focus. If there is no desired role, it uses an
inferred skill or the word "general." It also applies the user's remote or
location preference.

The output explains the goal, the signals used for ranking, and the steps the
agent will perform. Showing the plan makes the agent's behavior transparent.

9.3 Job retrieval: fetch(live)

When live is False, fetch immediately returns DEMO_JOBS.

When live is True, it sends an HTTP GET request to the public Arbeitnow job-board
API. The request includes a ShiftScout user-agent header and has a ten-second
timeout. json.load converts the response from JSON into Python objects.

Every external job is converted into the same internal dictionary structure as
the demo jobs. This normalization means the ranking and interface code do not
need to know where a job came from.

If any network, timeout, parsing, or service error occurs, the broad exception
handler returns DEMO_JOBS. The status message reports that the live feed was
unavailable and names the error type. This graceful fallback keeps the portal
working offline.

9.4 Matching and ranking: rank(profile, jobs)

The rank method is the core recommendation algorithm.

First it obtains inferred skills. It also extracts words from desired_role with
a regular expression. For each job, it combines the job title and description
into lowercase text.

The score is calculated as follows:

* 15 points for every candidate skill found in the job text
* 18 points for every desired-role term found in the job text
* 15 additional points when the user requests remote work and the job is remote
* 40 points removed when the user requests remote work but the job is not remote
* 10 points when the user's location appears in the job location

The final score is limited to the range 0 to 100.

For example, if a job matches Python and SQL and one role word, its base score is:

    (2 skills x 15) + (1 role word x 18) = 48

The method also builds a plain-language reason such as:

    role alignment: developer; skill matches: python, sql; remote preference

Jobs are sorted by score from highest to lowest. This is an explainable ranking
system, but it is not a statistical probability. A score of 80 means strong
keyword alignment under these rules, not an 80 percent chance of being hired.

9.5 Application note: application_note(profile, job)

This method identifies up to four profile skills that also occur in the selected
job description. It inserts those skills, the job title, company, candidate name,
and email into a short application message.

If no skills overlap, it uses a general transferable-skills sentence. The note
is a starting draft and should always be reviewed and personalized by the user.


10. THE GRAPHICAL INTERFACE
---------------------------

Class: App(tk.Tk)

App inherits from Tk, so an App object is the main desktop window.

App.__init__()
    Configures the title, initial size, and minimum size. It creates Store and
    JobAgent objects and initializes the job-results list.

    Tkinter variables connect form controls to Python values:

    * StringVar for text fields
    * BooleanVar for checkboxes
    * StringVar for the status message

    __init__ then calls _build() to create widgets and _load() to restore saved
    profile and application data.

10.1 Tabs

The ttk.Notebook contains three tabs.

My profile:
    Contains entries for name, email, location, desired role, and skills; a large
    text box for CV content; a remote-only checkbox; and import/save buttons.

Find jobs:
    Contains the live-jobs checkbox, agent button, current status, agent plan,
    ranked result table, selected-job details, and action buttons.

Tracker:
    Displays locally tracked applications and includes a refresh button.

Grid weights and pack expansion allow important widgets to grow when the window
is resized.

10.2 Reading and saving the form

App.profile()
    Reads every form control and creates a Profile object. strip() removes extra
    leading and trailing whitespace.

App.save(quiet=False)
    Checks that name and email are present and that the email contains an @ sign.
    It displays a warning and returns False when validation fails. Otherwise it
    saves the profile and returns True. quiet=True avoids an extra success dialog
    when saving automatically before a search.

This is intentionally basic email validation. A production app could use a more
complete validator, although it should still avoid rejecting valid unusual email
addresses.

App._load()
    Loads saved profile values into the form when the application starts. It also
    refreshes the application tracker.

10.3 Importing a CV

App.import_cv()
    Opens a file-selection dialog. The current version is designed for text CVs.
    It reads the chosen file as UTF-8 and replaces invalid bytes safely. An error
    dialog appears if the file cannot be read.

PDF and DOCX parsing are not included because the goal is to use only Python's
standard library. Users can copy text from those files and paste it into the CV
box. Third-party parsers could be added later.

10.4 Running a search without freezing the interface

App.search()
    Saves and validates the current profile, displays the agent plan, changes the
    status message, and starts a background thread.

App._search_worker(profile)
    Retrieves and ranks jobs in the background. Network access can take several
    seconds, so doing this work on Tkinter's main thread would freeze the window.

    Tkinter widgets should be changed only from the main interface thread.
    Therefore, self.after(0, ...) schedules _show_results to run safely there.

App._show_results(jobs, source)
    Stores results, clears old table rows, inserts up to 100 ranked jobs, and
    updates the source/status label.

10.5 Selecting and acting on a job

App.selected()
    Converts the selected table row ID into an index in self.jobs. It returns the
    corresponding job or None if no row is selected.

App.show_job()
    Runs when the table selection changes. It displays the job, company, score,
    reason, URL, and a shortened description.

App.track()
    Requires a selected job, saves it through Store.track(), refreshes the
    tracker, and displays confirmation.

App.note()
    Requires a selected job, calls JobAgent.application_note(), and opens a new
    editable window containing the generated draft.

App.refresh_tracker()
    Clears the tracker table and reloads its rows from SQLite.


11. TESTS
---------

test_app.py uses Python's unittest module.

ShiftScoutTests.setUp()
    Creates one reusable example profile before every test.

test_agent_ranks_relevant_job_first()
    Confirms that a profile requesting Python development ranks the demo Python
    developer role first and gives it a positive score.

test_profile_round_trip()
    Creates a temporary directory and SQLite database, saves the profile, loads
    it, and verifies that the result is identical. The temporary files are
    automatically removed after the test.

test_note_contains_identity_and_job()
    Confirms that a generated note includes both the user's name and the selected
    job title.

These tests focus on logic that can run without opening the graphical interface
or accessing the internet. More tests could cover remote filtering, location
bonuses, missing details, duplicate tracking, and mocked network responses.


12. PRIVACY, SECURITY, AND LIMITATIONS
--------------------------------------

Privacy:

* Profile and tracked-job information are stored locally in shiftscout.db.
* The live request retrieves public jobs and does not include the CV or email.
* Anyone with access to the database file may be able to read its content.
* SQLite data is not encrypted by this project.

Security:

* Database values use SQL parameters instead of string-built SQL.
* The HTTP request uses HTTPS and a timeout.
* Job descriptions are treated as text, not executed as Python or HTML.
* The app does not automatically apply, email employers, or open job URLs.

Current limitations:

* Keyword scoring cannot understand context, seniority, synonyms, or negation.
* The live API may be unavailable or may not contain jobs for every country.
* The application reads text CV files, not PDF or DOCX files.
* Only one candidate profile is stored.
* Tracking status is initially fixed to "Interested."
* Duplicate jobs can be added to the tracker.
* Generated notes are templates rather than LLM-written letters.
* The match percentage is a normalized rule score, not a hiring prediction.


13. IDEAS FOR EXTENDING THE PROJECT
-----------------------------------

Beginner-friendly extensions:

* Add buttons to change tracker status to Applied, Interview, Offer, or Rejected.
* Add delete and edit actions for tracked jobs.
* Prevent duplicate tracking by making the URL unique.
* Add filters for minimum score, company, location, and keywords.
* Export tracked jobs to CSV using Python's csv module.
* Add pagination and show more than 100 results.
* Add a button that opens the selected URL with webbrowser.open().

Intermediate extensions:

* Move Store, JobAgent, and App into separate modules.
* Add configuration and logging modules.
* Support several job APIs behind a common provider interface.
* Cache downloaded jobs in SQLite.
* Add database migrations and multiple user profiles.
* Parse PDF and DOCX CV files with optional third-party packages.
* Improve tokenization, synonyms, skill weighting, and experience-level matching.
* Build a browser interface with a Python framework such as Flask or Django.

AI extensions:

* Call a language model to extract structured experience from a CV.
* Use embeddings to compare semantic meaning instead of exact keywords.
* Generate customized cover letters using evidence from the CV.
* Add an agent that periodically checks several approved job sources.
* Let the agent suggest profile improvements and missing skills.

Any AI extension should protect personal data, show what information is being
sent to an external service, obtain user consent, and require review before an
application is submitted.


14. DESIGN SUMMARY
------------------

ShiftScout follows a simple separation of concerns:

    Profile       represents candidate data
         |
         v
    Store         saves and retrieves local data
         |
         v
    JobAgent      plans, retrieves, ranks, and explains jobs
         |
         v
    App           presents everything through Tkinter

This structure keeps the project approachable while demonstrating useful ideas:
data modeling, persistent storage, API access, offline fallback, background work,
explainable recommendations, input validation, automated tests, and a complete
event-driven desktop workflow.

The most important principle is that the agent assists the user rather than
acting without supervision. It recommends and drafts; the user reviews and makes
the final decision.
